About two days ago, we saw twenty-four laws
from this book. And we compared it with The
Ramayana. I thought, there are twenty-four
more to go, why not bring in the OTHER great
Indian epic? The Mahabharatha? Shall we give
it a go?
Namaste! Powers of Kṛṣṇā, this time!
Same book. But, the second half, the second
set of twenty-four laws, we are going to dip
into the stories of Kṛṣṇā, the stories
from The Mahabharatha! We are going to see
if we can draw some parallels.
Law Number 25:- Re-create yourself! Come
up with a new definition! One husband gets
one wife. One wife gets one husband. Why should
that be the case always?! Draupadi brings
that angle to the story. Whether it was an
accident, whether it was a purposeful intent,
we will not know. There are too many stories
for us to identify which one. But, stories
like "Draupadi asking for an accomplished
husband multiple times, and being given a
husband five times" and "Draupadi asking for
a husband with five special qualities, and
being told that all five is not possible in
one person, so, please take five!" exist!
Law Number 26:- Keep your hands clean! No
better way to recollect this particular law
except to think about this Yadava Prince.
This King. Kṛṣṇā. He is not even a
warrior clan. He didn't pick up a single weapon.
But, look at the devastation he brought about!
He was the mastermind behind The Mahabharatha!
And if you take a look at what he did wreak,…
that is amazing! He kept his hands clean!
Law Number 27:- Play on people's need to believe
to create a cult-like following! Ekalavya
had already learned a lot, using Drona as
his "virtual Guru". But, cruel and selfish
teacher of Arjuna that he was, he took away
Ekalavya's thumb as Guru Dakshina! But, that
didn't stop Ekalavya from practising his skill!
He continued at it! He became an amazing warrior..
without using that important thumb finger!
So much so, that even today, there are warrior
clans in tribal India who pay homage to Ekalavya
by not using the thumb finger. In fact, even
at the Olympics, archers don't use their thumbs!
What a coup! Don't you think?!
Law Number 28:- Enter action with boldness!
I am reminded of just one story. I am sure
you are reminded of that same story too. Abhimanyu!
How he entered that Chakra Vyooha without
ever wondering whether he knew how to come
out successfully from it. He never did. But,
that is why we probably remember him. He entered
with boldness!
Law Number 29:- Plan all the way to the end!
I never knew such a sidestory existed inside
The Mahabharatha all these years, until I
did some research about this. Did you know?!
Surprising! Ved Vyaasa, the architect of Mahabharatha,
the poet, the writer, an important role-player,
once met the Pandavas and advised them about
the destined Game of Dice. He is supposed
to have implored them to please lose! "Because,
the universe is waiting! We need you to lose,
so that you can win later" - he is supposed
to have said! Wow! Planning all the way to
the end! Is it not?!
Law Number 30:- Make your accomplishments
seem effortless! Lifting mountains is already
an old trick. Already done and dusted in The
Ramayana itself! The Sanjeevi Mountain was
lifted by Hanuman with a great leap across
the ocean. That story already exists. We have
to do something different! He didn't just
lift the Govardhana Giri! He lifted it effortlessly
with his "Left Hand Little Finger"! How amazing
is that!
Law Number 31:- Control the options. Get others
to play with the cards you deal! You should
be the master of that destiny! There is a
story that goes like this in The Mahabharatha!
Both Arjuna and Duryodhana head over to ask
for help from Kṛṣṇā. But, Arjuna sits
at the feet and Duryodhana sits at the head
of the bed. And, because of that, when Kṛṣṇā
wakes up, the first person he sets eyes on
is Arjuna, and so he offers them this. "I
am unbiased. I follow Dharma. I can give myself
to one Army. And I can give all my.. the rest
of my soldiers.. of the Narayana Army.. I
can give to the other Army. And, I promise
not to fight. I won't take up weapons myself".
He looks at Arjuna and adds, "I saw you first.
So, I will give you the option to choose first."
Arjuna immediately, respectfully, says, "Be
with me, My Lord. That is all I need!". And,
Duryodhana just can't believe his good luck,
and he runs away with the Kṛṣṇā army!
We know what happens later though but that's
the thing… control the options, and get
others to play with the cards you deal!
Law Number 32:- Play to people's fantasies!
Remember the Kṛṣṇā Leela? That Raasa
Leela? That Maya? Where, to each Gopika, based
on that Gopika's desire and dreams, Kṛṣṇā
appears. Not only did Kṛṣṇā appear
to each Gopika, he did what they wanted him
to do! Not only that! He appeared as if he
was only with that Gopika! What a complete
fantasy!!
Law Number 33:- Discover each man's thumbscrew!
Each person has a "breaking point" button.
We just have to locate that button and press
firmly there! A great warrior named Jayathratha.
And, his boon was, whoever beheads him, whoever
causes his head to fall down on earth, will
die, with that person's head exploding! What
does Arjuna do? With great celerity, he releases
an arrow, severs his head, and lifting it
up in the air, drops it on to the lap of his
meditating father! And he drops it, not knowing
what it is… He dies, and Jayathratha dies.
Know each person's thumbscrew!
Law Number 34:- Be royal in your own fashion.
Act like a king to be treated like one! All
the pictures, all the movies, all the TV serials,
all the books that I have read… fail to
acknowledge this little bit. "Hey.. They've
been banished to the jungles for thirteen
years.. And, on top of that, one year of living
incognito. A widow. Five able-bodied males.
Two guys who look like twins. A guy who resembles
a living breathing mountain. Another who always
speaks the truth and does the "right thing".
If they go together wherever they go, can't
even a common man identify that these are
the Pandavas and Kunti Devi? So, that's what
happened. They were royal in their own fashion.
Even if they weren't clad in princely attire,
people knew who they were.
Law Number 35:- Master the art of timing!
Drona is undefeatable. And, they plot against
him. Ashwattama, his son, cannot be killed.
But, they kill an elephant called Ashwattama,
and loudly, Bheema declares Ashwattama has
been killed. Drona is not able to believe
it.. Drona looks at Yudhishtra - who never
lies - "Yudhishra? Is Ashwattama dead?
Is this true?" "Well, Ashwattama Hataahataha…
Narova Kunjarovaa"… drags Yudhishtra, meaning,
"I am not sure if it is a human being or an
elephant"… And at that time, at that exact
moment - Kṛṣṇā blows his Paanchajanya,
his conchshell and the noise is drowning out
everything, and Drona drops his weapons and
gets into a meditative mode and that's when
he is beheaded. Timing!
Law Number 36:- Disdain things you cannot
have. Ignoring them is the best revenge! There
are so many boons, so many curses, so many
thousand-year-penances, so many Gods appearing,
right in front of the eyes, in The Mahabharatha.
They all feature one man performing a penance,
and somebody trying to distract that person.
So, basically, penance itself is a metaphor.
Anyway, you are not going to attain it…
The moment you realise you aren't going to
attain it, you throw it away as sour grapes,
by doing so you get an amazing sense of clarity
in your mind, and that will lead you to something
more than what you thought you could never
even achieve. Isn't that the essence of all
penance?!
Law Number 37:- Create compelling spectacles!
That magical palace! Draupadi's palace! Where
Duryodhana falters.. He's confused. Is this
marble, is this water, is this a flower? Is
this real? Is this virtual? He is not able
to understand anything! A full book has been
written on this subject! Called The Palace
of Illusions! Divakaruni's book about Draupadi
is titled "The Palace of Illusions"! It was
a really compelling spectacle!
Law Number 38:- Think as you like but behave
like others! I did think quite a lot about
this. Where does such a thing feature in The
Mahabharatha..? And, that's when Shikhandi
came to mind. Is he Shikhandi? Is SHE Shikhandi?
Are they Shikhandini? Are they a reincarnation
of Amba? A woman born as a man? A woman becoming
a man just for one night? A woman becoming
a man whenever she wants? A woman with an
unfinished task? She is born a woman. But
she trains as a soldier. She behaves like
a man. I thought that was the closest I could
come.
Law Number 39:- Stir up waters to catch fish!
At the very beginning of the story of The
Mahabharatha, there is a scene where the Earth
Goddess cries and laments to the Gods. Mother
Earth cries! "There is too much bad in this
world. I am bending in the weight. I am not
able to withstand this. Please save me. Relieve
me of this burden." she asks. "No problem,
we will be sending down one of our guys! He
will be featuring a blue skin all over. He
will be the cause of much strife and unrest.
A lot of damage to both sides!" What! 116
crore people died, as per a historical reference.
Nobody is left behind. Not the Pandavas. Not
the Kauravas. Such is the utter decimation.
Mother Earth got what she asked for! She stirred
up the waters!
Law Number 40:- Despise the free lunch! If
something is offered for free, read the fine
print first! That is what they didn't do,
those four Pandavas! In a substory called
The Yakshaprashna, near the shore of a beautiful
lake, these four Pandavas will see some beautiful
fruits and start eating them. The fifth Pandava
will head over there. He will be told, "These
belong to a Yaksha. These people didn't ask
permission and that is why they are all dead
and lying on the shore." - says the Yaksha.
Yudhishtra replies, "I don't want it. If it
belongs to you, I don't want it. If you have
questions, ask me, I have some answers". He
is ravenously hungry, but he ignores his hunger.
He doesn't want what belongs to somebody else.
He doesn't want a free lunch.
Law Number 41:- Avoid stepping into a great
man's shoes! That is what they did though.
Dhritharashtra, just because he was the eldest,
how can he just like that inherit that amazing
antiquated throne…? To sit on the Throne
of the Kuru Dynasty, one needs skill, ability,
capability! They should have seated Vidhura
on it, instead. As the grand wise man..! Instead
of that, they placed a blind man, blinded
to all the corruption that was happening around
him… Great man's shoes… they tried stepping
in.
Law Number 42:- Strike the shepherd, and the
sheep will scatter! We know that millions
fought this war. There is mythological data
about this. As well as historical data too.
But, how many names do we really know? Probably
eighteen! Because eighteen chieftains, the
most important ones, they fought. And when
they fell, their armies went home, or died,
left leaderless. So, strike the shepherd,
and the sheep will scatter.
Law Number 43:- Work on the hearts and minds
of others! That is what Lord Kṛṣṇā
did. With the Bhagavath Gita. When Arjuna
was dumbstruck.. How can I fight against my
guru? How can I fight against my uncle? These
are my brothers? How can I do this? At this
wavering moment, Kṛṣṇā intervenes,
asks Arjuna to keep his "heart" aside, asks
him to listen to the advice coming to his
brain, explains what Karma Yoga is, the importance
of Duty, and he delivers the beautiful, beautiful
advice.
Law Number 44:- Disarm and infuriate with
the mirror effect! There are countless weapons.
Small arrows. Asthras. Big arrows. Arrows
that are never supposed to be used, and so
on. One of them is the Naaraayanaasthra. When
Drona was beheaded, Drona's son, Ashwattama,
who's not dead actually, is so infuriated
that he takes that special arrow from his
quiver and releases The Naaraayanaasthra.
So, what's so special about this weapon? Well,
it will completely utterly destroy anybody
who stands against it. And, Kṛṣṇā knows
about it! And, guess what he does? He saves
the Pandavas by ordering everybody to prostrate
on the ground. Just surrender yourselves completely.
Heart, Mind, Soul, and Body! The Naaraayanaasthra
doesn't know what to do…! Mirror effect!
It prostrates itself, goes away! Interesting,
eh?!
Law Number 45:- Preach the need for change,
but never reform too much at once! There are
those who claim that The Mahabharatha is the
Fifth Veda. The reason The Mahabharatha was
conceived and written and gifted to mankind?
The Four Vedas were a little too tight. Were
kind of arcane. For common man to understand
the concepts easily, there has to be a story-driven
narrative, they felt, and that is how The
Mahabharatha was born, say some! When Kṛṣṇā
laid out The Bhagavath Gita, he made some
modifications, but before that, he understood
what The Vedas were. He spent time at the
Gurukul of Sage Saandeepani and learned a
lot. He debates with the master. He challenges
the master. And only after all that learning,
he comes up with the essence of The Srimad
Bhagavath Gita. Yes, he preaches, but he doesn't
reform too much all at once!
Law Number 46:- Never appear too perfect!
Didn't Kṛṣṇā say he would never brandish
a weapon? But then, did you know there is
a scene like this one in The Mahabharatha?
Arjuna begging Kṛṣṇā to drop the wheel
that Kṛṣṇā is aiming at Bheeshma. You
see, Arjuna has been shooting arrows at Bheeshma
in vain, and Bheeshma is blowing them away
to pieces, and Arjuna is losing again and
again and Kṛṣṇā is infuriated, and
wants to take the matter into his own hands!
He demonstrates short-temper! For a brief
moment! He is God. Incarnate. But, imperfect!
A bit!
Law Number 47:- Do not go past the mark you
aimed for. In victory, learn when to stop!
There is a crucial moment in The Mahabharatha
where Karna uses a weapon called The Naagaasthra
at Arjuna. He is aiming at Arjuna's heart.
And at that time, Shalya, another king, trying
to help Karna, says, "Hey Karna, aim at his
heart!" "Who are you to advice me, I know
what I am doing.. Do you think I will miss
my mark?" thinks Karna, and he aims at Arjuna's
head, and Kṛṣṇā (timing again!) presses
the chariot a bit down and it takes Arjuna's
head-dress off, rather than the head itself!
Interesting!
And, finally, Law Number 48:- What a way to
end this long, long tour that we have had!
Assume formlessness! Isn't that the essence
of The Bhagavath Gita and that Vishwaroopa
Darshanam that Arjuna and a few others get?!
I am everything! I am nothing! I am your brother!
I am your sister! Your uncle! I am fire. I
am rock. I am also nothing. I am the past.
I am the present. I am the future. I am you.
Assuming formlessness.
Anyway, I enjoyed sharing these forty-eight
laws with you. We will come back to these
forty-eight in a modern context in one of
our future Quotidians. Thank you for now!
Ohhh! Closing thought! By the way, this Mahabharatha?
Eighteen Parvas. Eighteen large chapters.
The Bhagavath Gita found inside The Mahabharatha?
Eighteen chapters! How many armies fought?
Eighteen armies! Eighteen very huge armies!
Seven from The Pandavas side, and eleven from
The Kauravas side. Great! And, how many days
did the war go on for? Mahabharatha war - Eighteen
days! Something about this number eighteen
and The Mahabharatha! Don't you say?! And,
breaking my head about this number, it suddenly
dawned on me! Wow! Eighteen, seen as a hexadecimal
number, if you convert it to a decimal format,
guess what number you get?! Try it, and you
will be blown away! Let us meet again next
week! Thank you!